Improve README for `<LinkControl />` with historical context and props docs. (#19677)
WordPress/gutenberg: packages/block-editor/src/components/link-control/README.md

but these tended to be highly tailored to their individual use cases and were
not standardised, each having their own implementation.

These older UIs tended to make use of two existing components: `URLInput` and
`URLPopover`. When a requirement was raised to implement a new UI for hyperlink
creation, an assessment of these existing components was undertaken and it was
determined that they were too opinionated as to be easily refactored to
accommodate the new use cases required by the new UI. Attempting to do so would
also have meant unavoidable breaking changes to the interface of `URLInput`
which would have (most probably) caused breaking changes to ripple across not
only the Core codebase, but also that of 3rd party Plugins.

As a result, it was agreed that a new component `LinkControl` would be created
to realise the new hyperlink creation interface. This new UI would begin life as
an experimental component which would consume `URLInput` internally. The API of
`URLInput` would be enhanced as required with "experimental" features to
facilitate the implementation of the new UI with the goal of eventually phasing
out the use of `URLInput` entirely.

> Indeed, over time, is is expected that `URLInput` will be depracted in favour of

Reviewer: Just spotted what I think is a typo that I thought I'd share. :) 

```suggestion
Indeed, over time, is is expected that `URLInput` will be deprecated in favour of
```

canonical UI component for the creation of hyperlinks and will enable the
simplification of the more complex internal mechanics of `LinkControl` which are
currently necessary to enable it to mesh well with the older APIs exposed by
`URLInput`.

## Search Suggestions

Currently LinkControl will handle two types of input to create hyperlinks:

1. Entity searches - the user may input text-based search queries for entities retrieved from
   remove data sources (in the context of WordPress these are `Pages`). For
   example a user might search for a `Page` they have just created by name (eg:
   About) and the UI will return a matching result if found.
2. Direct entry - the user may also enter any arbitrary URL-like text. This
   includes full URLs (https://), URL fragements (eg: `#myinternallink`), `tel`
   protocol links (eg: `tel: 0800 1234`) and `mailto` protocol links (eg:
   `mailto: hello@wordpress.org).

### Data sources

By default LinkControl utilizes the `__experimentalFetchLinkSuggestions` API
from `core/block-editor` in order to retrieve search suggestions for matching
`Page` post-type entities.

> It is however, possible to provide your own entity search handler via the `fetchSearchSuggestions` prop.

Reviewer 2: I removed this from the component recently since it was not used.

Author: Which part was not used? Sorry im confused.

Reviewer 2: This prop was not used in Gutenberg itself, we always relied on the internal implementation.

Author: Removed 👍

These older UIs tended to make use of two existing components: `URLInput` and `URLPopover`. When a requirement was raised to implement a new UI for hyperlink creation, an assessment of these existing components was undertaken and it was determined that they were too opinionated as to be easily refactored to accommodate the new use cases required by the new UI. Attempting to do so would also have meant unavoidable breaking changes to the interface of `URLInput` which would have (most probably) caused breaking changes to ripple across not only the Core codebase, but also that of 3rd party Plugins.

As a result, it was agreed that a new component `LinkControl` would be created to realise the new hyperlink creation interface. This new UI would begin life as an experimental component which would consume `URLInput` internally. The API of `URLInput` would be enhanced as required with "experimental" features to facilitate the implementation of the new UI with the goal of eventually phasing

> out the use of `URLInput` entirely.

Reviewer 3: Unneeded line break.

## Relationship to `<URLInput>`

As of Gutenberg 7.4, `<LinkControl>` became the default link creation interface within the Block Editor, replacing previous disparate uses of `<URLInput>` and standardizing the UI.

Nonetheless, it should be remembered that `<LinkControl>` builds **on top of** `<URLInput>` and makes use of it under the hood.

The distinction between the two components is perhaps best represented as:

* `<URLInput>` - an input for presenting and managing selection behaviors associated with choosing a URL, optionally from a pool of available candidates.
* `<LinkControl>` - includes the features of `<URLInput>`, plus additional UI and behaviors to control how this URL applies to the concept of a "link". This includes link "settings" (eg: "opens in new tab", etc) and dynamic, "on the fly" link creation capabilities.

## Search Suggestions

> Currently LinkControl will handle two types of input to create hyperlinks:

Reviewer 3: LinkControl should be `LinkControl`

1. Entity searches - the user may input text-based search queries for entities retrieved from remove data sources (in the context of WordPress these are `Pages`). For example a user might search for a `Page` they have just created by name (eg: About) and the UI will return a matching result if found.

> 2. Direct entry - the user may also enter any arbitrary URL-like text. This includes full URLs (https://), URL fragements (eg: `#myinternallink`), `tel` protocol links (eg: `tel: 0800 1234`) and `mailto` protocol links (eg: `mailto: hello@wordpress.org).

Reviewer 3: `mailto: hello@wordpress.org`). is missing the closing apostrophe-ish mark to close the code comment.

In addition, `<LinkControl>` also allows for on-the-fly creation of links based on the **current content of the `<input>` element**. When enabled, a default "Create new" search suggestion is appended to all non-URL-like search results.

When this suggestion is selected it will call the `createSuggestion` prop affording the developer the ability to create new links on the fly (the [Navigation Block uses this to allow creation of Pages
from within the Block](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/19775/files)). See below for more details.

### Data sources

> By default LinkControl utilizes the `__experimentalFetchLinkSuggestions` API from `core/block-editor` in order to retrieve search suggestions for matching `Page` post-type entities.

Reviewer 3: LinkControl should be `LinkControl`

not standardised, each having their own implementation.

These older UIs tended to make use of two existing components: `URLInput` and
`URLPopover`. When a requirement was raised to implement a new UI for hyperlink
creation, an assessment of these existing components was undertaken and it was
determined that they were too opinionated as to be easily refactored to
accommodate the new use cases required by the new UI. Attempting to do so would
also have meant unavoidable breaking changes to the interface of `URLInput`
which would have (most probably) caused breaking changes to ripple across not
only the Core codebase, but also that of 3rd party Plugins.

As a result, it was agreed that a new component `LinkControl` would be created
to realise the new hyperlink creation interface. This new UI would begin life as
an experimental component which would consume `URLInput` internally. The API of
`URLInput` would be enhanced as required with "experimental" features to
facilitate the implementation of the new UI with the goal of eventually phasing
out the use of `URLInput` entirely.

## Relationship to `<URLInput>`

> As of Gutenberg 7.4, `<LinkControl> became the default link creation interface

Author: Fixed.

  candidates.
* `<LinkControl>` - includes the features of `<URLInput>` , plus additional
  UI and behaviors to control how this URL applies to the concept of a "link". This includes link
  "settings" (eg: "opens in new tab", etc) and dynamic, "on the fly" link
  creation capabilities.

## Search Suggestions

Currently LinkControl will handle two types of input to create hyperlinks:

1. Entity searches - the user may input text-based search queries for entities retrieved from
   remove data sources (in the context of WordPress these are `Pages`). For
   example a user might search for a `Page` they have just created by name (eg:
   About) and the UI will return a matching result if found.
2. Direct entry - the user may also enter any arbitrary URL-like text. This
   includes full URLs (https://), URL fragements (eg: `#myinternallink`), `tel`
   protocol links (eg: `tel: 0800 1234`) and `mailto` protocol links (eg:
   `mailto: hello@wordpress.org).

In addition, `<LinkControl>` also allows for on-the-fly creation of links based
on the **current content of the `<input>` element**. When enabled, a default
"Create new" search suggestion is appended to all non-URL-like search results.

> When this suggestion is

Author: Fixed all these now. Due to VSCode.

Current link value.

A link `value` is composed of a union between the values of default link properties and any custom link `settings`.

Default properties include:

- `url` (`string`): Link URL.
- `title` (`string`, optional): Link title.
- `opensInNewTab` (`boolean`, optional): Whether link should open in a new browser tab. This value is only assigned if not providing a custom `settings` prop.

> ### settings

Reviewer 3: Should this be ### `settings` since it's a prop?

];
```

An array of settings objects associated with a link (for example: a setting to determine whether or not the link opens in a new tab). Each object will be used to render a `ToggleControl` for that setting.

> ### onClose

Author: Fixed.

];
```

An array of settings objects associated with a link (for example: a setting to determine whether or not the link opens in a new tab). Each object will be used to render a `ToggleControl` for that setting.

> ### onClose

Reviewer 3: Should this be ### `onClose` since it's a prop?

- Type: `boolean`
- Required: No

> If passed as either `true` or `false`, controls the internal editing state of the component to respectively show or not to show the URL input field.

Author: ```suggestion
Controls the internal editing state of the component. If passed as either `true` or `false` will respectively show or hide the URL input field.
```
Rewording to make this clearer.

Also can we check whether it really has to be `true` or `false` as strict value types. For example if I pass `1` and it is cooerced into a boolean then does this cause some other unexpected behaviour? How about `undefined`?

### createSuggestion

- Type: `function`
- Required: No
- Returns: When called may return either a new `suggestion` directly or a `Promise` which resolves to a
new `suggestion`.

Used to handle the dynamic creation of a new `suggestion` (and ultimately new link `value`) within the Link UI.

When provided, an option is appended to all search results requests which when clicked will call the `createSuggestion` callback (passing the current value of the search `<input>`). This affords the parent component the opportunity to dynamically create a new link `suggestion` (see above).

This `suggestion` will then be _automatically_ passed to the `onChange` handler to create **the next link value**.

As a result of the above, this prop is often used to allow on the fly creation of new entities (eg: `Posts`, `Pages`) based on the text the user has entered into the link search UI. As an example, the Navigation Block uses `createSuggestion` to create Pages on the fly from within the Block itself.

#### Search `suggestion` values

A `suggestion` should have the following shape:

```js
{
	id: // uniquely identifies the suggestion.
	type: // the type of the suggestion (eg: `post`).

> 	title: // Human-readable label for the suggestion.

Author: ```suggestion
	title: // human-readable label for the suggestion.
```

Consistent case

- Type: `boolean`
- Required: No

If passed as either `true` or `false`, controls the internal editing state of the component to respectively show or not to show the URL input field.

> ### createSuggestion

Reviewer 3: Should this be ### `createSuggestion` since it's a prop?

- Type: `function`
- Required: No

> - Returns: when called may return either a new `suggestion` directly or a `Promise` which resolves to a

Reviewer 3: Other comments have used a capital letter on the beginning of the comment, ie "Returns: When..." instead of "Returns: when..."

new `suggestion`.

Used to handle the dynamic creation of a new `suggestion` (and ultimately new link `value`) within the Link UI.

When provided, an option is appended to all search results requests which when clicked will call the `createSuggestion` callback (passing the current value of the search `<input>`). This affords the parent component the opportunity to dynamically create a new link `suggestion` (see above).

This `suggestion` will then be _automatically_ passed to the `onChange` handler to create **the next link value**.

> As a result of the above, this prop is often used to allow on-the-fly creation of new entities (eg: `Posts`, `Pages`) based on the text the user has entered into the link search UI. As an example, the Navigation Block uses `createSuggestion` to create Pages on the fly from within the Block itself.

Reviewer 3: Other places have used "on-the-fly" instead of "on the fly". After Google-ing it, it appears all instances of "on-the-fly" should be "on the fly"

];
```

An array of settings objects associated with a link (for example: a setting to
determine whether or not the link

> opens in a new tab). Each object will used to render a `ToggleControl` for that setting.

Author: Yes. Whoops! Fixed.

- Type: `boolean`
- Required: No

If passed as either `true` or `false`, controls the internal editing state of
the component to respectively show or not to show the URL input field.

### createSuggestion

- Type: `function`
- Required: No
- Returns: when called may return either a new `suggestion` directly or a `Promise` which resolves to a
new `suggestion`.

Used to handle the dynamic creation of a new `suggestion` (and ultimately new link
`value`) within the Link UI.

When provided, an option is appended to all search
results requests which when clicked will call the `createSuggestion` callback
(passing the current value of the search `<input>`). This affords the parent component the opportunity to dynamically create a new
link `suggestion` (see above).

This `suggestion` will then be _automatically_ passed to the
`onChange` handler to create **the next link value**.

As a result of the above, this prop is often used to allow on-the-fly creation of new entities (eg: `Posts`,
`Pages`) based on the text the user has entered into the link search UI. As an

> example, the Navigation Block uses `createSuggestion` to create Pages on fly

Reviewer 3: "to create Pages on fly" -> "to create Pages on-the-fly"

Author: Nice spot. Fixed.
